---
author: 'Srisivan.k'
fontsize: 14pt
geometry: margin=1in
title: 'The Travel to Tirupati.'
---

![Tirupathi](Tirupathi.jpg "Thirupathi")

This was the first time I went to Tirupati, the temple town.

It was 2:30 am, my mother woke me with a cup of coffee. After that we
got ready for the journey in the next two hours. Meanwhile, our
grandparents were ready before us. My grandfather is well known in the
family for his briskness especially to go on a trip like this.
My mother and grandmother had prepared lunch and breakfast. It was upma
for breakfast and puliogare for lunch.

We left for the bus stand in about 4:45 am, with my father, who dropped
us. The streets were deserted except for some people and cycles roaming
on the road. Stray dogs were howling here and there. But when we reached
the mainroad, there were some trucks and busses moving and honking
around.

The bus arrived after 10 minutes, at 4:55. We boarded the bus by five. I
and my sister found our seats in the front quickly. My mother and
grandparents were back of us.

A lady draped in yellow coloured sari and a little aged, urged my mother
move front quickly. Even though my mother kept on moving and there was
no rush, she was pushing hardly against my mother. My mother could feel
some movment in her handbag. She finally lost her patience and screamed
at the lady to go first. The lady left my mother the way and got down
the bus and ran away, which was surprising. My mother settled and
checked her bag. She was right. *The lady had tried to steal stuff from
her bag! Thank goodness, my mother's glasses had protected her things.*
In a later point of day we realised that pack of chocolates were gone.

We were lucky enough to find a seats in the front itself. The bus
started in about five minutes. In the first one hour I was awake in the
bus. I looking out of the window, the world was dark blue colour. The
trees, plants and buildings made dark patches in the dark blue sky. The
air was gushing through the windows. The feelings was so nice. After
enjoying this for a while, eventually I fell asleep.

The bus stopped at main stops, like *Mulbagal, Chittor, Kolar,
Palmaner.* I had slept nicely till the bus stopped for a break at
Mulbagal. We had our brakfast there. I did not sleep thereafter.

The sun was a perfect circle and orange in colour. The road was
surrounded with trees and plants on both sides. It was filled with
curves and turns. Now the sky was light blue.

I was sitting with my grandfather. He was adivising me to observe
everything on the road, especially the green boards with distances for
destinations on it.

We reached at *Tirupati* at about 10:30. The first place we visited was
*Tiruchanur* the place where the temple of Lakshmi, *Sri Venkateshvara
Swamy's wife,* exists. The temple is named as *Alamelu Mangapuram.*

The temple had strict rules. For example, you had to leave your
electronic devices and footwares outside the temple. There were many old
people selling many things cotton candies, toy guns, fruits and sacred
items.

After submitting the footwares and and phones outside the temple, we
headed to the maingate, but that was not an easy job. There were
multiple queues leading to the maingate. They were of three types of
them : two special, that is, paid queues, and a free queue.

We at first thought that everything were same, but it was not. The guy
at the special queue stopped us and told us to go to the other queue. My
grandfather asked the reason, to that the guy replied that we were
supposed to take the ticket before itself. My grandfather thanked him
and told *"Nevermind,"* and continued moving.

The crowd was irresistable. There were more than 250 people present. The
people had no patience at all. I felt like I was squashed like a fruit
between them.

The queue led us directly from the main entrance, called *gopuram,* till
the main sacred sanctum. I couldn't even see the goddess properly! I
just had a glance at her. The people behind me didn't give me enough
time to properly look at her.

After seeing the goddess we took a round of the temple. There were many
small reliefs on the walls of the temple, but we had no time to even
gaze at them. There were two reasons for this, that is,

1.  People were rushing and pushing,

2.  We only had little time to spend there. We had to go the *Tirumala*
    temple by two.

After collecting our things, we went to the bus stand.

Now, the temple at Tirupati is divided into two parts : the temple at
the base of the hills, called *Tirupati,* and the temple up the hills
called the *Tirumala*. Now we were headed to Tirupati.

Lucky us, we got a bus without waiting much. As like the last time, we
got seats in the front. I sat in the single seat next to the driver. I
could see both front and in the sides. The bus travelled for 5 minutes,
and then stopped at the checking station.

Here they check the whole bus, passengers and their luggages. We got
down the bus and walked to the metal detector. There were two ways. One
for gents and other for ladies. There were men and women before the
machines for checking our body. We had to leave our luggage in the
conveyor belt, which led to the scanner. This made things easy for the
people to check!

*What a proper checking system!*

After all that checking, we boarded the bus again. The buss started off.
For the first one kilometre we travelled on road. After that we began
climbing the hills. The roads on the hills was perfectly made. Smooth
surface. It was covered with trees and flowers on both sides. It was
filled with steep and deep curves.

After going a little up, the beautiful flowers began to decrease. It
began more and more *mountaneous*. At certain points the trees on the
left side of the bus, where I was sitting, vanished. I couldd see the
houses and roads down below. The houses were like *small boxes made of
sand!* The road was like *lines made by children with a stick in sand!*

Like I said before, The turns and curves were many in number. As the
driver drove on these, the bus was turning and twisting. I felt, at each
turn and curve, that the bus was going to topple off the mountain! The
bus travel involved moving around the 7 hills, or *edukondalam* in
telugu. So I could look at the hills we've just passed, back of us! My
mother and sister and me too enjoyed it very much.

After 45 minutes of travel, we landed at the *Tirumala*, the main
temple. We got refreshed there, had our lunch and started off.

There were many steps to do before going to the temple. First we ordered
a jeep to leave us at the *special darshan.* It was pre-booked, by my
uncle, costing Rs.300 per head.

When we reached the checking centre, where they check our *Aadhars*, our
identification numbers, when the guy there informed us that we must only
wear only *veshti* to the temple, not pants. We were very frustrated.
Then I remembred some people selling *veshtis* in the front. I had
wondered why they were doing so. Now I got the reason!

*They had a good business plan!*

The guy at the checking centre had informed that I too had to wear a
veshti. But when we went to buy it, the man who was selling it, told I
needn't. We were in a dilemma, when we again approached the checking
centre, lucky us, he was busy in some other work. He didn't notice me
wearing a pant. I slipped!

Next we went to the counters where we should submit our *Aaadhar*,
elctronic devices, and footwares. After submitting those, we went to the
metal detectors. My mother had not submitted the power bank in the
earlier counter. So, she had to go back and submit it, due to this, we
wasted precious 10 minutes!

The counters directly led to some passages which led to the main gopuram
itself. I thought that after one passage, we would find ourselves inside
the temple. But I was comletely wrong. One passage led to another
identical one. It was frustratiting in the beginning itself. Even though
we were in *special darshan,* there was so much crowd in it too! That
too on a monday! My mother informed that we were lucky on that day
beacause as the godowns were closed, much time was saved.

After 5 passages of the same identical looks, we reached the main
gopuram. I thought that it was a good time for us beacause we reached
the gopuram in 35 minutes of time. My mother informed that this was good
because otherwise we had to be waiting for like one and a half hour
there! After entering into the temple, the queue again slowed down.

An uncle, beside me, seemed have got thrilled so much. Suddenly, he
screamed, *Govinda! Govinda!* all the others followed him for another 5
times. His voice was becoming louder and louder with each call.

After waiting for about 30 minutes, we were left for the shrine. As soon
as the shrine drew nearer, the pushings from the back became more and
more harder.

A lady, in particular nearly pushed me off. I felt very bad about the
people present there. I did not take good look at the god, for the push
behind me was irresistable. My sister being only 6 years old couldn't
see the image of the god properly. So, my mother lifted her up for her
to see. But the lady at the entrance told that *you must not lift kids
up.*

*What kind of rules **is** that?*

In fact, there were many things around the temple to explore. But the
crowd present was merciless to anyone present there. After seeing the
whole temple and going around it, I felt very uneasy. It was due to the
different water and the crowds.

After that, we took a rest near the *kolam* of the temple, where it is
considered, that if you take a bath at the holy *kolam,* all you sins
will be appeased. It also in which the statues of gods are given a bath.
We requested our grandfather to go and collect the *prasadham,* which is
considered as a holy food, and given only at temples.

Usually these kolams were natural and clean to bathe in. But as many
pilgrims come to tirupati, they have added much chlorine in the water to
make it clean. It was usually green in colour, but now it is in blue!

There were many kids playing where we were taking rest, in particular,
two small boys running after one another. The latter, who was doing the
catching part, felt very ambitious at the game. He kept running after
the other vigourusly.

Strangely enough, the heat of the sun was at least *moderate* near the
kolam. I kept wondering why. One reason to this was, we were near to the
kolam. The other reason, which I figured out later, was that there was a
pipe down of the raised platform we were sitting, and there were holes
present in it. At fixed point of times, the water would gush out of the
holes and to the ground. This made the air more moist. But I was still
wondering *where the water came from?* My mother explained to me that,
the waters were brought here through pipes for the kolam.

*What a nice plan!*

As soon as my grandfather came, we chose a shady spot, and let him wear
his pant and remove his veshti. We ate some snaks there. There were
different peoples selling different things there : 3 uncles asking for
photographs, some selling sacred items, some selling snaks, and some
asking *us* to sign in to some form at the tirupati.

We then went collect our items. But it was not in the same place we had
submitted earlier. It was father away outside the temple.We went there
by the stairs. Beacause it was summer and very hot, the steps were like
pricking pins into your feet! We had to show our signed ticket to
collect our items, which we had previously signed.

Collecting our items we began to look for a bus to go to the base of the
temple. At first, we just went there and waited. But there was no use. A
conductor informed us to collect a *return ticket* before itself, in
order t go down. He also informed us that if we haven't one, we could go
and collect it. My grandfather thanked him, and went by himself to
collect it. He came after 10 minutes, and we soon boarded a bus.

After waiting for the passengers to board, he finally took off. This
journey was too filled with curves. But this driver gave extra
*show-off* by steeply turning on those curves. Each time a curve came,
the bus would entirely tilt! At these points, my grandmother, who was
sitting next to me, would nearly slide off her seat!

One the way, we saw many Conservation of Animals boards. Animals like
pandas, deer, lions, tigers were there. But we didn't go inside and take
a look.

When we reached our destination, we had a small tiffin there and started
looking for a bus. At first, no bus was in sight. After waiting like 20
minutes, we finally found a bus that was travelling to banglore, and
boarded it by seven. But this time, we were in the middle seats.

I didn't get sleep for a long time beacause my throat was parched. There
was no water. But, um, I mean our *sweet home water* not drinking water.

My mother told that she will buy something cold for the thirst, when the
bus stops at some point. We waited like one hour, but in vain. Tired of
waiting I fell asleep. Finally the bust stooped at ten, we bought our
things there and continued on our journey.I was so sleepy, that I
couldn't notice the stop we were taking a break.

After that, I didn't get sleep. I kept gazing into the dark and feeling
the chill air. Finally, after two hours, our stop came. We got down the
bus, caught an auto, came to home. The streets were same like before,
but now I coudn't see any people or cycles roaming aroun. It was very
silent. I enjoyed this trip to tirupati, and I hope to go to more places
during the summer vacation.
